---
title: Jekyll, a tool for creating blogs focused on developers
author: Juan Antonio Romero Molero
date: 2019-08-24 19:00:00 +0200
categories: [Tools]
tags: [jekyll]
description: "Create your own lightweight, fully customizable blog with Jekyll and deploy it in just a few minutes"
---

## Introduction

If you are a developer and you would like to have your blog, with Jekyll you can create it quickly and maintain full control to customize it.

Jekyll allows us to write our posts using markdown, customize our template and add plugins that offer us features like SEO metatags or an automatic sitemap generator among other things.

## Why use Jekyll

Although exposed like this it looks like another CMS, it has nothing to do with other tools for this purpose that have huge administration panels, databases or complex visual editors for non-developers.

This tool uses **Ruby** to build static files from our template and the content of our posts, so the final result once generated is lightweight and we can upload it to any hosting without worrying about databases or other services.

Don't be scared if you've never programmed in Ruby because you don't need to touch a single line of Ruby code to create the project, write posts or customize the template. You only need to install Ruby to test and visualize the website locally before uploading it.

Furthermore, you can comfortably deploy your blog with **GitHub Pages**, and it's free. Not only does it have built-in support for this platform, but it is the [officially recommended tool by GitHub](https://docs.github.com/en/pages/setting-up-a-github-pages-site-with-jekyll/about-github-pages-and-jekyll) for this purpose.

## Key benefits

I've already decided to use Jekyll for my blog, and I'll tell you the reasons that made me choose it:

- You can write your posts using **Markdown**.
- It allows you to **change your theme fast**. You can get themes [here](http://jekyllthemes.org/) and [here](https://jekyllthemes.io/).
- It allows you to **create your theme from scratch**.
- You can **reuse template parts** with no difficulty, like the header or footer of your blog.
- **Easy to deploy** regardless of the service you use.
- You have a lot of [plugins developed by the Jekyll community](https://github.com/planetjekyll/awesome-jekyll-plugins) to add features likes **metatags**, **sitemap** or **RSS**.
- If you need it, you can **create your plugins** in Ruby to add more features.

## Get started

You don't need much to get started with Jekyll. Install Ruby on your computer and the necessary gems to create the project. With that, you can test your blog before uploading it. Change the site title, description, and write your first posts. Lastly, create a repository on GitHub, upload the project and [set up GitHub Pages](https://jekyllrb.com/docs/github-pages/).

If you still find it cumbersome anyway, you have at your disposal [Jekyll Now](https://github.com/barryclark/jekyll-now) that allows you to create your blog without leaving GitHub.

I won't tell you more because I prefer that you see the complete and updated documentation on his [official website](https://jekyllrb.com/docs/).

Take a look and start writing!